The effect of bump height on the strain variation is studied.
The study occurs during the thermal cycling test.
The thermal cycling test involves ACA flip-chip joints.
Kuntjoro Pinardi is an individual.
Zonghe Lai is a Member of IEEE.
Dietmar Vogel is an individual.
Yi Lan Kang is an individual.
Johan Liu is a Senior Member of IEEE.
Sheng Liu is an Associate Member of IEEE.
Ralf Haug is an individual.
Magnus Willander is a Member of IEEE.
Flip-chip joining using anisotropically conductive adhesive (ACA) is a technique for electronics packaging.
Many factors can influence the reliability of the ACA flip-chip joint.
Bump height is one of the factors that can influence the reliability of the ACA flip-chip joint.
The strain development during the thermal cycling test of flip-chip joining with different bump heights was studied in this work.
The effect of bump height is significant in the interface between the bumps and the pads.
A bigger volume area of high strain is found for higher bump in the interface between the bumps and the pads.
The calculations show that there is practically no effect of the bump height on the strain variation in the bumps.
The calculations show that there is practically no effect of the bump height on the strain variation in the pads.
Anisotropically conductive adhesive is a term.
Finite element is a term.
Strains are a term.
Stresses are a term.
LIP-CHIP joining using anisotropically conductive adhesive has attracted much interest.
The interest in LIP-CHIP joining using anisotropically conductive adhesive is for reasons of ultra-fine.
Low-cost capability is referenced in sources [1]-[5].
One important issue is whether the interconnection technology is suitable for use in volume production.
The suitability for use in volume production depends on the reliability of joints.
Many factors can affect the reliability of joints.
The joint strength can affect the reliability of joints.
The external environment can affect the reliability of joints.
Sufficient bonding pressure will improve the mechanical contact between the bonded elements.
Suitable design of the ACA assembly configurations will improve the mechanical contact between the bonded elements.
Efforts to reduce the external degradative effect on ACA joints include the selection of bonding materials.
Bonding materials are selected based on their thermal, mechanical, and electrical properties.
Materials with small differences in properties are used for bonding.
The manuscript was received on October 28, 1999.
The manuscript was revised on January 31, 2000.
The paper was presented at PEP 99, The Second IEEE International Symposium on Polymeric Electronics Packaging.
PEP 99 was held in Gothenburg, Sweden from October 24–28, 1999.
This work was supported by R. Bosch, Germany.
This work was supported by the IVF Solderless Flip-Chip Consortium member companies.
This work was supported by the National Swedish Board for Industrial and Technical Development.
The support was within the Sino-Swedish bilateral research Program on 'Characterization and Development on Novel Interconnecting Materials for Electronics Packaging.'
This work was recommended for publication by Editor J. Liu.
The recommendation for publication was based on the evaluation of the reviewers' comments.
K. Pinardi is with the Physical Electronics and Photonics Department at Chalmers University of Technology, Göteborg 412 96, Sweden.
M. Willander is with the Physical Electronics and Photonics Department at Chalmers University of Technology, Göteborg 412 96, Sweden.
Z. Lai is with the Division of Electronics Production at Chalmers University of Technology, Göteborg 412 96, Sweden.
Z. Lai is also with the IVF-The Swedish Institute of Production Engineering Research, Mölndal 431 53, Sweden.
J. Liu is with the Division of Electronics Production at Chalmers University of Technology, Göteborg 412 96, Sweden.
D. Vogel is with the Fraunhofer-Institut für Zuverlässigkeit und Mikrointegration (IZM), Berlin, Germany.
Y. L. Kang is with the Department of Mechanics at Tianjing University, China.
S. Liu is with the Electronic Packaging Laboratory at Wayne State University, Detroit, MI 48202 USA.
R. Haug is with the Robert Bosch GmbH, Stuttgart, Germany.
The Publisher Item Identifier is S 1521-3331(00)04144-1.
Differences in coefficient of thermal expansion (CTE) are noted.
For ACA joining, the bumps and pads are made of hard materials such as Ni or Cu.
The bumps and the pads are very strong mechanically.
The bumps and the pads cannot easily be deformed by the external stresses found in their service environments.
The interface between the bump and pad plays an important role in determining the juncture of the ACA joint.
The interface between the bump and pad plays an important role in determining the joint strength.
It is possible that the volume of adhesive in the joint influences the interconnection reliability.
Lai et al. have investigated the effect of bump height.
Lai et al.'s experiments indicated that for joints with a rigid substrate, an excessively high bump could induce poor reliability.
This work studied the reason for the poor reliability of ACA flip-chip joints on FR4 rigid substrate.
The reason for the poor reliability of ACA flip-chip joints on FR4 rigid substrate is due to the effect of bump height on strain variation.
The effect of bump height on strain variation was observed during the thermal cycling test.
The finite element analysis (FEM) is based on the test chip shown in Figure 1.
The dimension of the chips was 7.5 mm by 7.5 mm.
The bump size on the chips was 100 micrometers in diameter.
The pitch on the chips was 450 micrometers.
Four different values of bump height are used on the chips.
The bump heights used on the chips are 4 micrometers, 20 micrometers, 40 micrometers, and 70 micrometers.
The chip configuration is shown in Figure 1.
The finite element procedure is evaluated in two-dimensional plane strain idealization.
The finite element structure is shown in Figure 2.
The thickness of the ACA layers between the bumps and the substrate pads is assumed to be 3 micrometers in the finite element structure.
The finite element analysis is performed for half of the structure due to the symmetry in the geometry.
The simulations are performed for a thermal load.
The thermal load involves a cyclic temperature change between 40 degrees Celsius and 125 degrees Celsius.
The hold time for the thermal load is 15 minutes.
The ramp time for the thermal load is 1.5 minutes.
The material properties for all materials except ACA film are given in Table I.
The mechanical properties of ACA film are based on measurements described in reference [6].
Detailed experimental results of the measurements will be published.
The studies on ACA film include different relative humidity values and different temperatures.
The coefficient of thermal expansion (CTE) of ACA film used in the simulation is between 50 CTE and 80 CTE (ppm).
The typical curve of load versus deformation at 60 degrees Celsius, 0.02/min strain rate, for three different relative humidity values is shown in Figure 3(a).
The stress-strain curve at room condition for different temperatures is given in Figure 3(b).
Figure 3(a) shows the influence of the relative humidity on the mechanical properties of ACF tested with the same strain rate.
Fig. 2 is a schematic picture.
The schematic picture in Fig. 2 is of a flip chip package.
The flip chip package in Fig. 2 is used in stress analysis.
The mechanical strength increases as relative humidity decreases.
The Young’s Modulus decreases as the temperature increases.
The decrease in Young’s Modulus with increasing temperature is shown in Figure 3(b).
Fig. 4 shows the Von Mises stress distribution for the flip chip structure when the temperature load is at C.
The maximum value of the Von Mises stress is located at the outmost joints.
The outmost joints are indicated by MX in the picture.
The same results are obtained for the same structure when the temperature load is at C.
The maximum value of the Von Mises stress is found at the outmost joint when the temperature load is at C.
Fig. 5 shows the strain fields at the outmost joint when C.
The distribution is for the case of 20 m bump height.
The top is mentioned in the context of the strain fields at the outmost joint.
Fig. 3(a) presents load versus deformation curves.
The load versus deformation curves are measured at 60 degrees Celsius.
The load versus deformation curves are measured at a strain rate of 0.02 per minute.
The load versus deformation curves are measured for three different relative humidity values.
Fig. 3(b) presents the stress-strain curve.
The stress-strain curve is measured at room condition.
The stress-strain curve is measured for three different temperatures.
Fig. 4 shows the Von Mises stress distribution for the flip chip package.
The temperature for the flip chip package is 40 degrees Celsius.
The stress unit is measured in MPa.
The bottom figure represents the shear strain.
The contours are chosen between 0.02 to 0.02 for the pattern boxes given in the figure.
The strain is more than 0.02 if the color is black.
The same contours are used for all the strain figures.
Figure 6 shows the same figure as Figure 5 but for the case of 4 m bump height.
Figure 7 shows the same figure as Figure 5 but for the case of 40 m.
The main features of the simulations are described.
The strain distribution in the joint is not symmetric.
The maximum strain is located in the adhesive layer.
The value of the strain for the outmost joints at location A is higher than the strain located at location B.
Location A and location B are shown in Figure 5.
The strain in the bumps and in the pads are in the same order of magnitude.
The strain value ranges between 0.004 and 0.004 in the bumps and pads area.
The shear strain is very high, more than 0.02, in the adhesive area and in the PCB substrate.
The shear strain is very small, less than 0.001, in the pad and in the bump.
The effect of bump height can be seen in the strain changes in the interface between the bumps and the pads.
The volume fraction covered by high strain value, shown by black contours, is more for higher bump.
The effect of bump height is significant for the stress and the strain distributions in the shear directions.
The effect of the bump height could not be found in the bumps and in the pads.
All the figures show that the maximum strains are located at the interfaces in the adhesive area or in the PCB substrate.
This large strain is due to the CTE mismatch of the Silicon die and the composite substrate.
Fig. 5 shows the strain distribution at the outermost bump.
The bump height in Fig. 5 is 20 micrometers.
The top section of Fig. 5 displays strain.
The middle section of Fig. 5 displays strain.
The bottom section of Fig. 5 displays shear strain.
Fig. 6 shows the strain distribution for a case of 4 micrometer bump height.
The top part of Fig. 6 displays strain.
The middle part of Fig. 6 displays strain.
The bottom part of Fig. 6 displays shear strain.
Fig. 7 is the same as Fig. 5.
Fig. 7 is for the case of 40 micrometer bump height.
A MicroDAC is a deformation measurement method.
A MicroDAC is based on digital image correlation.
In-plane surface strain fields of components under thermo-mechanical load are determined from optical and electron optical micrographs.
Speckle photographic basics are used to extend in-plane deformation measurement.
The high resolution of scanning electron microscopes allows measuring local strain fields inside such small structures of characteristic size of 50 m and less.
A correlation-based image-processing algorithm is applied to determine a set of local pattern displacements between two object states.
Whole displacement fields are measured.
The software is able to track local structures with a subpixel accuracy of approximately 10 nm.
Fig. 8 shows the strain fields measured by MicroDAC for one ACA joint heated from room temperature to 116 C.
The strain fields are for the second bump from the right side.
The measurement is performed for a different test chip other than the test chip shown in Fig. 1.
The general situation for this joint is that there is no essential shear in the field of measurement.
A relatively high strain is localized in the interface between the bump and the pad.
The measurements indicate a specific finding.
Global thermal mismatch between the board and the silicon does not result in high shear at the outermost bump interconnects.
The calculations and the experiments show that the strain is highest for the outermost joint.
The experiments indicate that the dominant strain is in the normal direction.
The measurements give a relatively high strain (0.003) in the direction in the pads region.
This high strain in the pads region is not found in the calculations.
Strain is localized in the interface between the bumps and the pads.
A relatively low value shear strain (0.001) is measured in the outermost joints.
The effect of bump height is significant only in the interface between the bumps and the pads.
A bigger volume area of high strain is found for a higher bump.
There is practically no effect of the bump height on the strain changes in the bumps and in the pads.
The effect of bump height is different for Anisotropic Conductive Adhesive (ACA) joints than for solder joints.
For solder joints, increasing the bump height (stand-off) will increase the fatigue life of joints.
A high bump can relax the shear stresses in the corner regions of the solder.
This increase in fatigue life due to high bump is not the case for ACA flip-chip joints.
The effect of the bump height in ACA joints will only be limited to the interface area between the bump and the pad.
Bump height is not a controlling factor for the reliability of ACA joints.
Lai et al. showed that for ACA joints with rigid substrates, an excessively high bump (bump height of 70 micrometers) could induce poor reliability.
The reliability problems of having a high bump can occur since an excessively high bump can easily cause a porous structure in the ACA layers.
Both measurement and simulation indicate that the strain is highest for the outermost joint.
Both measurement and simulation indicate that the normal strain is in the same order of magnitude.
Compared to the experiments, the calculations show high shear strain in the bump and in the pad.
The reason for the uncoincidence may come from both measurement accuracy and ACA parameters used in the calculations.
Further work is necessary to include some features that are not included at present.
These features include the effect of particle size and particle distributions on the strains and stresses variation.
These features also include the effect of the planarity of the substrate, bumps, and pads.
The authors would like to thank Dr. Kristiansen.
Dr. Kristiansen provided useful comments.
Dr. Kristiansen provided suggestions.
Z. Lai is an author.
R. Lai is an author.
K. Persson is an author.
J. Liu is an author.
The authors wrote a paper titled 'Effect of bump height on the reliability of ACA flip-chip joining with FR4 rigid and polyimide flexible substrate'.
The paper was published in the Journal of Electronic Manufacturing.
The volume of the journal in which the paper was published is 8.
The issue numbers of the journal in which the paper was published are 3 and 4.
The paper was published on pages 1 to 8.
The paper was published in the year 1998.
It appears that the input provided is incomplete and lacks clear context or full sentences to decompose into simple propositions.
Please provide a complete and coherent text or sentence for analysis.
I. Watanabe and K. Takemura authored a work.
The work by I. Watanabe and K. Takemura is titled 'Anisotropic conductive adhesive films for flip-chip interconnection'.
The work by I. Watanabe and K. Takemura is included in 'Conductive Adhesives for Electronics Packaging'.
J. Liu is the editor of 'Conductive Adhesives for Electronics Packaging'.
The publication 'Conductive Adhesives for Electronics Packaging' was published by Electrochemical Publications Ltd.
Electrochemical Publications Ltd. is located in London, U.K.
The publication year of 'Conductive Adhesives for Electronics Packaging' is 1998.
M.-J. Yim, K. W. Paik, Y. K. Kim, and H. N. Hwang conducted a study.
The study focuses on the electrical conduction mechanism of anisotropically conductive film (ACF).
The anisotropically conductive film (ACF) is used for LCD packaging applications.
The study was published in the book titled 'Advances in Electronic Packaging'.
The book 'Advances in Electronic Packaging' was published in New York.
The publisher of the book 'Advances in Electronic Packaging' is EEP.
The study was published in 1997.
The study appears in volume 19-1 of 'Advances in Electronic Packaging'.
The study is found on pages 65-72 of the volume.
M.-J. Yim, Y.-D. Jeon, and K.-W. Paik authored a paper.
The title of the paper is 'Electroless Ni bumped flip chip interconnections on an organic substrate using anisotropic conductive adhesives films (ACAs/ACF’s)'.
The paper was presented as an extended abstract.
The presentation occurred at the IMAPS Workshop on Flip Chip Technology.
The workshop took place in Atlanta, GA.
The workshop was organized by IMAPS.
The presentation was in March 1999.
J. Liu, Y. L. Kang, S. Liu, and J. Liu engaged in a private communication.
J. H. Lau and Y.-H. Pao authored the book titled 'Solder Joint Reliability of BGA, CSP, Flip Chip, and Fine Pitch SMT Assemblies.'
The book was published in 1997.
The book was published in New York.
The publisher of the book is McGraw-Hill.
Kuntjoro Pinardi received the M.Sc. degree in electrical engineering from Delft University of Technology in 1994.
Delft University of Technology is located in Delft, The Netherlands.
Kuntjoro Pinardi worked with IMEC from 1994 to 1997.
IMEC is located in Leuven, Belgium.
Kuntjoro Pinardi did research on stresses and strains of semiconductor devices from 1994 to 1997.
Kuntjoro Pinardi is currently doing research on finite element modeling of different electronic packages.
Zonghe Lai received the Ph.D. degree in materials science from Chalmers University of Technology, Mölndal, Sweden.
Zonghe Lai joined IVF, Mölndal, in 1994.
Zonghe Lai works on flip-chip assembly and chip on board at IVF, Mölndal.
Zonghe Lai's current research interest concentrates on the reliability and the failure mechanism of flip-chip adhesive joints.
Zonghe Lai's current research interest concentrates on the bondability of wire bonding.
Zonghe Lai especially focuses on the microstructure analysis of materials.
Zonghe Lai uses scanning electron microscopy (SEM) for microstructure analysis of materials.
Zonghe Lai uses transmission electron microscopy (TEM) for microstructure analysis of materials.
Zonghe Lai uses other surface analysis instruments for microstructure analysis of materials.
Zonghe Lai is currently working part time at the Division of Electronics Production at Chalmers University of Technology.
Dietmar Vogel received the Ph.D. degree in physics from the University St. Petersburg, Russia, in 1980.
Dietmar Vogel joined the Institute of Mechanics Chemnitz in 1983.
Since 1993, Dietmar Vogel has been working with the Fraunhofer Institute for Reliability and Microintegration (IZM), Berlin, Germany.
Dietmar Vogel's work at the Fraunhofer Institute for Reliability and Microintegration is concentrated on laser experiments.
Dietmar Vogel's work at the Fraunhofer Institute for Reliability and Microintegration involves micro deformation analysis (MicroDAC).
Dietmar Vogel's work at the Fraunhofer Institute for Reliability and Microintegration is in the field of electronic packaging.
Yi Lan Kang is a Professor.
Yi Lan Kang is with the Department of Mechanics.
The Department of Mechanics is at Tianjing University.
Tianjing University is in China.
Johan Liu received the M.S. degree in science from the Royal Institute of Technology, Stockholm, Sweden, in 1984.
Johan Liu received the Ph.D. degree in materials processing technology from the Royal Institute of Technology, Stockholm, Sweden, in 1989.
Johan Liu was with IVF, Mölndal, Sweden, until 1999.
Johan Liu was a Team Leader at IVF, Mölndal, Sweden.
Johan Liu coordinated multiclient research programs concerning interconnecting technology at IVF, Mölndal, Sweden.
The research programs included conductive adhesive joining, chip on board, and lead free solders.
Johan Liu is now a Professor at Chalmers University of Technology, Sweden.
Johan Liu has been chairing the Division of Electronics Production at Chalmers University of Technology, Sweden, since April 1999.
Johan Liu serves as the European Editor of the Journal of Electronics Manufacturing.
Johan Liu is a member of IMAPS.
Johan Liu was one of the initiators for the international forum.
A relatively low value shear strain is measured.
The value of the shear strain is 0.001.
Sheng Liu received the B.S. degree in aircraft design from Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics in 1983.
Sheng Liu received the M.S. degree in aircraft design from Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics in 1986.
Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics is located in Nanjing, China.
Sheng Liu received the Ph.D. degree in applied mechanics from Stanford University in 1992.
Stanford University is located in Stanford, CA.
Sheng Liu joined Wayne State University in 1995.
Wayne State University is located in Detroit, MI.
Sheng Liu is an Associate Professor at Wayne State University.
Sheng Liu is the Director of the Electronic Packaging Laboratory at Wayne State University.
Sheng Liu was with the Florida Institute of Technology from 1992 to 1995.
The Florida Institute of Technology is located in Melbourne.
Sheng Liu was an Assistant Professor of Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering at the Florida Institute of Technology.
Sheng Liu was with MARC Analysis Research Corporation from January 1992 to May 1992.
MARC Analysis Research Corporation is a nonlinear finite element company located in Palo Alto, CA.
Sheng Liu was a Consulting Engineer at MARC Analysis Research Corporation.
Sheng Liu was with Chengdu Aircraft Company from January 1986 to February 1988.
Chengdu Aircraft Company is located in China.
Sheng Liu was a Structural Design Engineer at Chengdu Aircraft Company.
Sheng Liu has been working on mechanical and thermal design and analysis of composite materials.
Sheng Liu has been working on fracture and progressive damage of layered materials and structures.
Sheng Liu's basic research goal is to advance the application of mechanics in the analysis, design, and fabrication of advanced materials and structures.
Sheng Liu's involvement in experiments includes engineering instrumentation, theoretical development, extensive numerical modeling, and verification.
Sheng Liu interacts with industry at every stage of the development.
Sheng Liu has published more than 90 technical articles in layered composites and packaging thermo-mechanical behaviors and reliability.
Sheng Liu received the Presidential Faculty Fellows award.
Sheng Liu received the ASME EEPD Young Engineer Award.
Sheng Liu is a member of ASME, ISHM, AIAA, ASTM, and SAMPE.
Sheng Liu is an Associate Editor for the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ELECTRONICS PACKAGING MANUFACTURING.
Sheng Liu is a member of the ASME EEPD Manufacturing committee.
Sheng Liu is a member of the ASME Division of Applied Mechanics Composite Committee.
Sheng Liu is a member of the ASME Material Processing Committee.
Sheng Liu served as NSF Panelist for polymer and composite processing proposal reviews.
Sheng Liu has been involved in numerous national and international symposiums and meetings.
Sheng Liu was one of the initiators of the 1st International Symposium of Electronic Packaging Technology in China in 1994 (ISEPT’94).
Sheng Liu was the Co-Chair of the Joint 2nd ISEPT and 1st ISHM International Electronic Packaging Conference in Shanghai, China, in December 1996.
Ralf Haug received the diploma degree in physics from the University of Stuttgart, Germany.
Ralf Haug received the Ph.D. degree in physics from the University of Stuttgart, Germany.
Since 1989, Ralf Haug has been with the Corporate Research and Development Department at Robert Bosch GmbH in Stuttgart, Germany.
Ralf Haug's work centers on polymer materials for electronics.
Ralf Haug's work centers on conduction mechanisms of thick film resistors.
Ralf Haug's work centers on electronic packaging.
Ralf Haug's research involved conductive adhesives in electronics.
Ralf Haug's research involved especially fundamentals of anisotropically conductive materials.
Ralf Haug's research involved conduction mechanisms of isotropically conductive adhesives for Surface-Mount Technology (SMT).
Ralf Haug's research involved flip-chip assembly technology with adhesives.
Magnus Willander was born in Varberg, Sweden, in 1948.
Magnus Willander received the M.Sc. degree in mathematics and physics from Lund University in 1973.
Lund University is located in Lund, Sweden.
Magnus Willander received the M.Sc. degree in technical physics from Uppsala University in 1976.
Uppsala University is located in Uppsala, Sweden.
Magnus Willander received the Ph.D. degree in applied physics from the Royal Institute of Technology in 1984.
The Royal Institute of Technology is located in Stockholm, Sweden.
Magnus Willander was a Circuit Designer at Philips Corporation from 1976 to 1980.
Philips Corporation is located in Stockholm, Sweden.
Magnus Willander was a Research Assistant at the Royal Institute of Technology from 1980 to 1984.
Magnus Willander was a Specialist in electronics at Nobel Industries from 1984 to 1985.
Nobel Industries is located in Stockholm, Sweden.
Magnus Willander was an Associate Professor at Linköping University from 1985 to 1995.
Linköping University is located in Linköping, Sweden.
Magnus Willander built up the Device Physics Group at Linköping University.
The Device Physics Group worked on quantum devices, field-effect and bipolar transistors, and photonic devices.
The Device Physics Group also worked on transport and recombination properties of semiconductors.
Magnus Willander's research at Linköping University included epitaxial silicon, silicon/germanium, silicon carbide, InP/InGaAs, GaAs/AlGaAs, and polymer materials.
Since 1995, Magnus Willander has been a Professor of physics at Göteborg University and Chalmers University of Technology.
Göteborg University and Chalmers University of Technology are located in Gothenburg, Sweden.
Magnus Willander's professorship focuses on nanoelectronics, photonics, and mesoscopic systems.
Magnus Willander has published numerous scientific publications in the areas of nanoelectronics, photonics, and mesoscopic systems.
Magnus Willander is a member of the American Physical Society (APS).