Evaluation Warning : The document was created with Spire.PDF for Python.          IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPONENTS AND PACKAGING TECHNOLOGIES, VOL. 23, NO. 3, SEPTEMBER 2000                                        447



          Effect of Bump Height on the Strain Variation During

             the Thermal Cycling Test of ACA Flip-Chip Joints



             Kuntjoro Pinardi, Zonghe Lai, Member, IEEE, Dietmar Vogel, Yi Lan Kang, Johan Liu, Senior Member, IEEE,

                          Sheng Liu, Associate Member, IEEE, Ralf Haug, and Magnus Willander, Member, IEEE







             Abstract—Flip-chip joining using anisotropically conductive  ferences in coefficient of thermal expansion (CTE) [4], [5]. For

          adhesive (ACA) has become a very attractive technique for  ACA joining, the bumps and pads are made of hard materials

          electronics packaging. Many factors can influence the reliability

                                                                              such as Ni or Cu. The bumps and the pads are very strong me-

          of the ACA flip-chip joint. Bump height, is one of these factors. In

                                                                              chanically that they can not easily be deformed by the external

          this work, the strain development during the thermal cycling test

          of flip-chip joining with different bump heights was studied. The  stresses found in their service environments. The interface be-

          effect of bump height is significant in the interface between the  tween the bump and pad will play an important role in deter-

          bumps and the pads. Bigger volume area of high strain is found  mining the juncture of the ACA joint and the joint strength.

          for higher bump in the interface between the bumps and the pads.

                                                                              Therefore it is possible that the volume of adhesive in the joint

          Our calculations show that there is practically no effect of the

                                                                              will be one of the effects to influence the interconnection reli-

          bump height on the strain variation in the bumps and in the pads.

                                                                              ability. To study the effect of the adhesive volume in the struc-

            Index  Terms—Anisotropically  conductive  adhesive,  finite

                                                                              ture indirectly Laiet al.[1] have investigated the effect of bump

          element, strains, stresses.

                                                                              height. Their experiments indicated that for joints with rigid

                                                                              substrate an excessively high bump could induce poor relia-

                                 I. INTRODUCTION                              bility. This work studied whether the reason for the poor reli-

                                                                              ability of ACA flip-chip joints on FR4 rigid substrate is due to

               LIP-CHIP joining using anisotropically conductive adhe-

                                                                              the effect of bump height on strain variation during the thermal

          Fsive has attracted much interest for reasons of ultra-fine and

                                                                              cycling test.

          low-cost capability [1]–[5]. One important issue whether this in-

          terconnection technology is suitable to be used in a volume pro-

          duction depends on the reliability of joints. Many factors can                         II. SAMPLE DESCRIPTION

          affect reliability such as the joint strength and the external en-

                                                                                The finite element (FEM) analysis is based on the test chip

          vironment. Sufficient bonding pressure and suitable design of

                                                                              shown in Fig. 1. The dimension of the chips was 7.5  7.5 mm,

          the ACA assembly configurations will improve the mechanical

                                                                              the bump size was 100  m in diameter and the pitch was

          contact between the bonded elements [3]. Efforts to reduce the

                                                                              450  m. four different values of bump height are used, which

          external degradative effect on ACA joints include the selection

                                                                              are: 4  m, 20  m, 40  m and 70  m. The chip configuration is

          of bonding materials based on their thermal, mechanical and

                                                                              shown in Fig. 1.

          electrical properties, for example using materials with small dif-

                                                                                The FE procedure is evaluated in two-dimensional plane

                                                                              strain idealization. The FE structure is given in Fig. 2 by

            Manuscript received October 28, 1999; revised January 31, 2000. This  assuming the thickness of the ACA layers between the bumps

          paper was presented at PEP 99, The Second IEEE International Symposium  and the substrate pads is 3  m. The FE is performed for

          on Polymeric Electronics Packaging, Gothenberg, Sweden, October 24–28,  half of the structure due to the symmetry in the geometry.

          1999. This work was supported by R. Bosch, Germany, the IVF Solderless

          Flip-Chip Consortium member companies, and the National Swedish Board  The simulations are performed for a thermal load of a cyclic

          for Industrial and Technical Development within the Sino-Swedish bilateral  temperature change between  40 C and 125 C with 15 min

          research Program on “Characterization and Development on Novel Intercon-  hold time and 1.5 min ramp time.

          necting Materials for Electronics Packaging.” This work was recommended for

          publication by Editor J. Liu upon evaluation of the reviewers’ comments.   The material properties are for all the materials except ACA

            K. Pinardi and M. Willander are with the Physical Electronics and Photonics  film is given in Table I. The mechanical properties of ACA film

          Department, Chalmers University of Technology, Göteborg 412 96, Sweden.

            Z. Lai is with the Division of Electronics Production, Department of Pro-  is based on the measurements performed described in [6] (De-

          duction Engineering, Chalmers University of Technology, Göteborg 412 96,  tailed experimental results will be published). They have studied

          Sweden. He is also with the IVF-The Swedish Institute of Production Engi-  the mechanical properties of ACA films for different relative hu-

          neering Research, Mölndal 431 53, Sweden.

            J. Liu is with the Division of Electronics Production, Department of Pro-  midity values and for different temperatures. Note that the CTE

          duction Engineering, Chalmers University of Technology, Göteborg 412 96,  of ACA film used in the simulation is 50  CTE  80 (ppm).

          Sweden.                                                             The typical curve of load         vs. deformation       (mm) (at

            D. Vogel is with the Fraunhofer-Institut für Zuverlässigkeit und Mikrointe-  60 C, 0.02/min strain rate, for three different relative humidity

          gration (IZM), Berlin, Germany.

            Y. L. Kang is with the Department of Mechanics, Tianjing University, China.  (RH) values) is shown in Fig. 3(a). The stress-strain curve at

            S. Liu is with the Electronic Packaging Laboratory, Wayne State University,  room condition for different temperatures is given in Fig. 3(b).

          Detroit, MI 48202 USA.

            R. Haug is with the Robert Bosch GmbH, Stuttgart, Germany.          Fig. 3(a) shows the influence of the relative humidity on the

            Publisher Item Identifier S 1521-3331(00)04144-1.                 mechanical properties of ACF tested with same strain rate and



                                                              1521–3331/00$10.00 © 2000 IEEE



              Authorized licensed use limited to: Universitatsbibliothek Erlangen Nurnberg. Downloaded on April 29,2024 at 12:01:46 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 




Evaluation Warning : The document was created with Spire.PDF for Python.          448                                       IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPONENTS AND PACKAGING TECHNOLOGIES, VOL. 23, NO. 3, SEPTEMBER 2000







                                                                              Fig. 3.  (a) Load versus deformation curves at 60 C, 0.02/min.strain rate,

                                                                              for three different relative humidity values. (b) The stress-strain curve at room

                                                                              condition for three different temperatures.



          Fig. 1.  Test chip.







          Fig. 2.  Schematic picture of flip chip package used in stress analysis.   Fig. 4.  Von Mises stress distribution for the flip chip package atT =
Evaluation Warning : The document was created with Spire.PDF for Python.          PINARDIet al.: EFFECT OF BUMP HEIGHT ON THE STRAIN VARIATION                                                                      449







          Fig. 5.  Strain distribution at the outmost bump for case of 20m bump height.

          Top: strain"  :Middle: strain"  :Bottom: shear strain"  :







          Fig. 6.  Strain distribution for case of 4 m bump height. Top: strain "  ;

          Middle: strain"  : Bottom: shear strain"  :







                                                                              Fig. 8.  Thermal strain measured by MicroDac.



                                                                              surements on the IC structures. In-plane surface strain fields

                                                                              of components under thermo-mechanical load are determined

                                                                              from optical and electron optical micrographs. Speckle photo-

                                                                              graphic basics are used to extend in-plane deformation measure-

                                                                              ment. The high resolution of scanning electron microscopes al-

                                                                              lows measuring local strain fields inside such small structures

                                                                              of characteristic size of 50  m and less. A correlation-based

                                                                              image-processing algorithm is then applied to determine a set

                                                                              of local pattern displacements between two object states, and fi-

                                                                              nally whole displacement fields are measured. The software is

                                                                              able to track local structures with a subpixel accuracy of approx-

                                                                              imately 10 nm.

                                                                                Fig. 8 shows the strain fields measured by MicroDAC for

                                                                              one ACA joint heated from room temperature to 116  C. The

          Fig. 7.  Same as Fig. 5 but for the case of 40m bump height.       strain fields is for the second bump from right side (note that



                                                                              the measurement is performed for different test chip other than

              IV. THERMAL STRAIN MEASUREMENT OF ACA JOINT

                                                                              test chip shown in Fig. 1). The general situation for this joint

            A MicroDAC—a deformation measurement method based on  is that there is no essential shear in the field of measurement

          correlation algorithms—was applied to local deformation mea-  and strain           and      increase toward the polymer substrate.



              Authorized licensed use limited to: Universitatsbibliothek Erlangen Nurnberg. Downloaded on April 29,2024 at 12:01:46 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 




Evaluation Warning : The document was created with Spire.PDF for Python.             450                                                   IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPONENTS AND PACKAGING TECHNOLOGIES, VOL. 23, NO. 3, SEPTEMBER 2000







             In addition, a relatively high strain                 is localized in the in-              [3] I. Watanabe and K. Takemura, “Anisotropic conductive adhesive films

             terface between bump and the pad. The measurements indicate                                    for flip-chip interconnection,” in Conductive Adhesives for Electronics

             that: global thermal mismatch between board and silicon is not                                 Packaging, J. Liu, Ed.  London, U.K.: Electrochemical Publications

                                                                                                            Ltd., 1998.

             transferred in a high shear at the outermost bump interconnects.                           [4] M.-J. Yim, K. W. Paik, Y. K. Kim, and H. N. Hwang, “A study on the

                                                                                                            electrical conduction mechanism of anisotropically conductive film

                                                                                                            (ACF) for LCD packaging applications,” in Advances in Electronic

                                                                                                            Packaging, New York: EEP, 1997, vol. 19-1, pp. 65–72.

                               V. D                                                                     [5] M.-J. Yim, Y.-D. Jeon, and K.-W. Paik, “Electroless Ni bumped flip chip

                                      ISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS

                                                                                                            interconnections on an organic substrate using anisotropic conductive

                                                                                                            adhesives films (ACAs/ACF’s),” in Extended Abstract in IMAPS Work-

                Our calculations and the experiments show that the strain is                                shop on Flip Chip Technology.  Atlanta, GA: IMAPS, Mar. 1999.

             highest for the outmost joint. The experiments indicate that the                           [6] J. Liu, Y. L. Kang, S. Liu, and J. Liu, private communication.

             dominant strain is in the normal direction. Our measurements                               [7] J. H. Lau and Y.-H. Pao,Solder Joint Reliability of BGA, CSP, Flip Chip,

                                                                                                            and Fine Pitch SMT Assemblies.  New York: McGraw-Hill, 1997.

             give relative high strain (0.003) in the                direction in the pads

             region, which is not found in the calculations. Strain                       is lo-

             calized in the interface between the bumps and the pads. Rela-

             tively low value shear strain (  0.001) is measured in the out-

             most joints. The effect of bump height is significant only in  Kuntjoro Pinardi received the M.Sc. degree in electrical engineering from

             the interface between the bumps and the pads. Bigger volume  Delft University of Technology, Delft, The Netherlands, in 1994.

             area of high strain is found for higher bump. There is practi-                            He worked with IMEC, Leuven, Belgium, from 1994 to 1997, doing research

                                                                                                     on stresses and strains of semiconductor devices. He is currently doing research

             cally no effect of the bump height on the strain changes in the  on finite element modeling of different electronic packages.

             bumps and in the pads. The effect of bump height is different for

             ACA joints than for solder joints. For solder joints increasing the

             bump height (stand-off) will increase the fatigue life of joints

             because a high bump can relax the shear stresses in the corner

             regions of the solder [7]. However, this is not the case for ACA  Zonghe Lai (M’97) received the Ph.D. degree in materials science from

             flip-chip joints. We have shown here that the effect of the bump  Chalmers University of Technology, Mölndal, Sweden.

                                                                                                       He joined IVF, Mölndal, in 1994, where he works on flip-chip assembly and

             height in ACA joints will only be limited to the interface area  chip on board. His current research interest concentrates on the reliability and

             between the bump and the pad. Therefore bump height is not  the failure mechanism of flip-chip adhesive joints and the bondability of wire

             a controlling factor for the ACA joints reliability. However Lai  bonding, especially the microstructure analysis of materials using scanning elec-

                                                                                                     tron microscopy (SEM), transmission electron microscopy (TEM), and other

             et al. [1] showed that for ACA joints with rigid substrates, an  surface analysis instruments. He is currently working part time at Division of

             excessively high bump (bump height of 70  m) could induce  Electronics Production, Chalmers University of Technology.

             poor reliability. The reliability problems of having high bump

             can occur since excessively high bump can easily cause a porous

             structure in the ACA layers [1]. Both measurement and simula-

             tion indicate that the strain is highest for the outmost joint and

             the normal strain             and        are in the same order of magni-  Dietmar Vogel received the Ph.D. degree in physics from the University St.

             tude. Compare to the experiments our calculations show high  Petersburg, Russia, in 1980.

                                                                                                       He joined the Institute of Mechanics Chemnitz in 1983. Since 1993, he has

             shear strain in the bump and in the pad. The reason for unco-  been working with the Fraunhofer Institute for Reliability and Microintegration

             incident may come from both measurement accuracy and ACA  (IZM), Berlin, Germany. His work there is concentrated on laser experiments

             parameters used in our calculations. Further work is necessary  and micro deformation analysis (MicroDAC) in the field of electronic pack-

                                                                                                     aging.

             to include some features that are not included at present such as:

             1) Effect of particle size and particle distributions on the strains

             and stresses variation and 2) effect of the planarity of the sub-

             strate, bumps, and pads.

                                                                                                     Yi Lan Kangis a Professor with Department of Mechanics, Tianjing University,

                                                                                                     China.



                                         ACKNOWLEDGMENT



                The authors would like to thank Dr. Kristiansen for useful

             comments and suggestions.

                                                                                                     Johan Liu(M’92–SM’96) received the M.S. degree in science and the Ph.D. de-

                                                                                                     gree in materials processing technology, both from the Royal Institute of Tech-

                                                                                                     nology, Stockholm, Sweden, in 1984 and 1989, respectively.

                                                                                                       He was with IVF, Mölndal, Sweden, until 1999 as a Team Leader and coor-

                                              REFERENCES                                             dinated multiclient research programs concerning interconnecting technology

                                                                                                     including conductive adhesive joining, chip on board, and lead free solders. He

                [1] Z. Lai, R. Lai, K. Persson, and J. Liu, “Effect of bump height on the re-  is now a Professor at Chalmers University of Technology, Sweden, chairing the

                     liability of ACA flip-chip joining with FR4 rigid and polyimide flexible  Division of Electronics Production since April 1999. He also serves as the Eu-

                     substrate,” J. Electron. Manufact., vol. 8, no. 3, 4, pp. 1–8, 1998.            ropean Editor of the Journal of Electronics Manufacturing.

                [2] J. Liu, “An overview of advances of conductive adhesive joining                    Dr. Liu is a member of IMAPS and was one of the initiators for the interna-

                     technology in electronics applications,” Mater. Technol., vol. 10, pp.  tional conference on adhesive joining in electronics manufacturing, in which he

                     247–252, 1995.                                                                  serves as Chairman of the Technical Committee.



                  Authorized licensed use limited to: Universitatsbibliothek Erlangen Nurnberg. Downloaded on April 29,2024 at 12:01:46 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 




Evaluation Warning : The document was created with Spire.PDF for Python.             PINARDI et al.: EFFECT OF BUMP HEIGHT ON THE STRAIN VARIATION                                                                                                          451







             Sheng Liu (M’94–A’95) received the B.S. and M.S. degrees in aircraft design  Ralf Haug received the diploma and Ph.D. degree in physics from the Univer-

             from the Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Nanjing, China,  sity of Stuttgart, Germany.

             in 1983 and 1986, respectively, and the Ph.D. degree in applied mechanics from            Since 1989, he has been with the Corporate Research and Development

             Stanford University, Stanford, CA, in 1992.                                            Department, Robert Bosch GmbH, Stuttgart, Germany. His work centers

               He joined Wayne State University (WSU), Detroit, MI, in 1995 as an Assis-  on polymer materials for electronics, conduction mechanisms of thick film

             tant Professor, and is now an Associate Professor and the Director of the Elec-  resistors, and electronic packaging. His research involved conductive adhesives

             tronic Packaging Laboratory. He was with the Florida Institute of Technology,  in electronics, especially fundamentals of anisotropically conductive materials,

             Melbourne, from 1992 to 1995, as an Assistant Professor of Mechanical and  conduction mechanisms of isotropically conductive adhesives for SMT, and

             Aerospace Engineering. He was with MARC Analysis Research Corporation,  flip-chip assembly technology with adhesives.

             Palo Alto, CA (a nonlinear finite element company), as a Consulting Engineer

             from January 1992 to May 1992, and Chengdu Aircraft Company, China, from

             January 1986 to February 1988, as a Structural Design Engineer. He has been

             working on mechanical and thermal design and analysis of composite mate-

             rials, and fracture and progressive damage of layered materials and structures.

             His basic research goal is to advance the application of mechanics in the anal-

             ysis, design and fabrication of advanced materials and structures. The direct  Magnus Willander (M’91) was born in Varberg, Sweden, in 1948. He

             involvement in experiments including engineering instrumentation, theoretical  received the M.Sc. degree in mathematics and physics from Lund University,

             development, extensive numerical modeling and verification, and interactions  Lund, Sweden, in 1973, the M.Sc. degree in technical physics from Uppsala

             with industry at every stage of the development have played significant roles in       University, Uppsala, Sweden, in 1976, and the Ph.D. degree in applied physics

             his intellectual growth. He has published more than 90 technical articles in lay-  from the Royal Institute of Technology, Stockholm, Sweden, in 1984.

             ered composites and packaging thermo-mechanical behaviors and reliability.                From 1976 to 1980, he was a Circuit Designer at Philips Corporation, Stock-

               Dr. Liu received the Presidential Faculty Fellows award and the ASME  holm, Sweden. From 1980 to 1984, he was a Research Assistant at the Royal

             EEPD Young Engineer Award. He is a member of ASME, ISHM, AIAA,  Institute of Technology. From 1984 to 1985, he was a Specialist in electronics

             ASTM, and SAMPE. He is an Associate Editor for the IEEE TRANSACTIONS  at Nobel Industries, Stockholm. From 1985 to 1995, he was an Associate Pro-

             ON ELECTRONICS PACKAGING MANUFACTURING. He is a member of the ASME  fessor at Linköping University, Linköping, Sweden, where he built up the De-

             EEPD Manufacturing committee, ASME Division of Applied Mechanics  vice Physics Group working on quantum devices, field-effect and bipolar tran-

             Composite Committee, and ASME Material Processing Committee. He also  sistors, and photonic devices, as well as trans-port and recombination properties

             served as NSF Panelist for polymer and composite processing proposal reviews.  of semiconductors, where his research included epitaxial silicon, silicon/ger-

             He has been involved in numerous national and international symposiums  manium, silicon carbide, InP/InGaAs, GaAs/AlGaAs, and polymer materials.

             and meetings. For instance, he was one of the people who initiated the 1st  Since 1995, he has been a Professor of physics (particularly in nanoelectronics,

             International Symposium of Electronic Packaging Technology in China in  photonics, and mesoscopic systems) at Göteborg University and Chalmers Uni-

             1994 (ISEPT’94). Recently, he was the Co-Chair of the Joint 2nd ISEPT and  versity of Technology, Gothenburg, Sweden. He has published numerous scien-

             1st ISHM International Electronic Packaging Conference, Shanghai, China,  tific publications in these areas.

             December 1996.                                                                            Dr. Willander is a member of APS.







                  Authorized licensed use limited to: Universitatsbibliothek Erlangen Nurnberg. Downloaded on April 29,2024 at 12:01:46 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 



